really like to talk to dr k about
executive dysfunction and how to conquer
it
as it has been the most crippling effect
caused by my mental illness and has
essentially made life
progress progress near impossible in
many respects
and yet this is a topic that seems to go
often untalked about in any sort
of detail especially in any sort of
solutionary
respect i've even struggled to get my
therapist to talk about it with me
perhaps that is because i have also
found that those who don't
deal with this issue have an especially
difficult time understanding it as well
it is hard for them to grasp the idea of
feeling
like you are literally unable to force
yourself to take an action
and i get it because i deal with it
every day and i still
find it hard to understand how it can be
this way i too often wonder why can't i
just do it like everybody else from my
point of view it is a bad enough
having to battle my mind but it is
torturous not being able to hardly ever
just get myself to do some sort of work
or even a fun hobby
to help myself through it on top of that
and it is very hard for me to find
purpose in myself
or work on other parts of my life and
mental health
as well when i can't actually manage
to hardly get myself to do simple or
even fun tasks
let alone those more important
purposeful ones
so basically it feels like i'm
constantly stuck in a solitary prison
and given nothing to do other than sit
and look out through the bars to see all
the things that i enjoy and want
need to take part in but can't okay this
is a great question
so the first question is what is
executive dysfunction
we have a part of our brain called the
frontal lobes
which plan and execute tasks okay
so what this means is that the example
that we're going to use to
explain executive dysfunction is i have
a three-year-old and i have a
five-year-old
if i tell my five-year-old to clean up
the room she can do it
if i tell my three-year-old to clean up
the room
she's gonna feel like she just can't do
it right so then what i have to do is i
have to tell my three-year-old okay
let's put the books away and the
three-year-old can do that i can tell
let's put the toys away but she can do
that let's put the stuffed animals away
she can do that she can put the ipad
away she can put the controller away she
can put her bowl away
but she needs me to structure those
tasks together to take like to reach an
abstract goal okay so executive function
is the ability to plan and execute tasks
so if i think about something like
finding a job
that requires a lot of executive
function right
so it requires me to think about okay
like what are the steps involved and
execute on those tasks
so the first thing to understand about
executive function is that
it improves with age and your executive
function kind of
uh you know reaches its full potential
it's somewhere between
the age ages of 30 and 32 and this has
to do with frontal lobe development
so the first issue for this person is
depending on how old you are
things may get better for you as you get
older
i'm not saying that it's sufficient now
like you can't really bank on that right
like you can't like
if you're a high school student with
poor executive function
you can't wait until you're 30 to do
high school
so that's the first thing just to
reassure you guys that you will get
better at this
over time until the age of 30 to 32. the
second thing that i found is that
executive function tends to get
negatively impacted by playing video
games
i know it sounds kind of weird but if
you spend a lot of time playing video
games
what video games essentially do is like
do the executive function for you okay i
know it sounds weird but like think
about this so i've been playing genji
impact recently right so like i don't
have
the the game sort of tells me what i
need to do like if you play world of
warcraft or genji
impact or whatever i don't have to plan
out i mean sort of people do in genshin
impact but
you know if you play a particular video
game the game tells you okay the next
step you need to do is this the next
step you need to do is this
like if i if i take ff7 for example like
ff7 doesn't start off in the first 10
minutes and say
hey beat sephiroth and then you have to
construct
how to get from where you are to like
beat sephiroth at the end
sure you know he's the bad guy and you
know he's the end goal but
gideo video games give you the steps
okay
so the problem that people with
executive function have or dysfunction
have
is that they don't they're not their
brains are not able to
plan out and execute each step of the
task
so if we think about like you know
planning and execution
what someone with a good executive
function can do is like plan out the
steps they understand that okay if i
need to clean my room
these are the six things that need to
happen so what people
with executive function experience is
paralysis
around goals so what that means is like
they know
like the three-year-old theoretically
knows
what a clean room looks like and if i
ask her like what in the room looks
dirty she can tell me that
so what's really frustrating about
people with executive dysfunction
is that they're they have insight
into um
their dysfunction but what's incredibly
frustrating about this is that despite
the insight
it doesn't actually change your brain
and allow your brain to actually do it
so you like the three-year-old can
understand what a clean room looks like
can understand that her room is dirty
but that
abstract level understanding is not the
same
as the frontal lobes being able to chunk
down that task
so really what executive function is is
the ability to take one task and like
chunk it into pieces right so when i
plan and execute like here's find a job
or clean a room and it's it's being able
like this process
is what's messed up with executive
dysfunction
okay and understanding it insight into
it
is not the same it's the ability to like
think through what
what to do so another example is like
you know sometimes we'll have like let's
say like you're having you're hosting a
party
so people who have like people who are
event planners
have really good executive dis uh
function so like
they like plan out this big task let's
throw a wedding this has to get done
this has to get done this has to get
done this has to get done so they're
very good
like very organized so the problem with
executive dysfunction is that we
aren't able to like figure out how to
chunk up a task and execute on it
and it feels incredibly paralyzing
because our brain is
literally not able to do this so if we
think about how you know how do you
start on a task that's too big
you can't so this is why people feel
paralyzed because if the task is too big
you literally cannot do it
like i can't like if i were to tell you
you know
win a nobel prize like
how do you even start with that like
that's crazy like you may be able to
theoretically map out what needs to be
done but you can't actually break it
apart
into like it's subsequent pieces and
actually execute on it
so then the question is what to do about
executive function
about executive dysfunction actually and
this is where there are a couple of
things to recognize
so when people um
have paralysis and executive dysfunction
there are a couple of different
components
so when you're paralyzed towards a
behavior there are
three things that i'd like to talk about
the first is operationalize
so what this means is like there's
actually a formal process that you can
get
trained in to do this
so this is what we call operationalizing
problems
um in in gamer terminology so like back
when we did
a lot of work with gamers i know we
still do a lot of work with gamers but i
used to
do a lot of work specifically around
video game addiction and what i would
teach people is how to
change an open-ended problem so this is
something like win nobel prize or find a
job
into a close-ended problem so what that
means is to essentially
go through the process of converting an
abstract thing
into like a discrete quest goal so like
forget about the quest
chain we're gonna like because we can't
map out the quest chain so or
actually what we're gonna do is we're
gonna take a goal and we're gonna map it
on to what we call a quest
chain and then the quest chain will have
discrete pieces
so this is called operationalizing
problems which gamers
are bad at the really interesting thing
is that gamers are actually better than
the average population
at this piece so if you give a gamer a
very discreet task
and you give them an end goal and you
give them all the pieces
they will actually outperform regular
people when it comes to doing that task
so this is a real scenario okay i was
taking a class at harvard business
school
and in the in the class at harvard
business school we were given a case and
we were told to solve this problem
about how to optimize flow through a
urology clinic
literally i was swamped at the time so i
logged onto discord and i was like hey
do you guys want to help me with this
and i just uploaded this
harvard business school case to group of
my degenerate gamer friends
and the next day they like came up with
like four or five solutions i went into
class two days later
i had the solutions for my gamer buddies
and they're like how what do you do and
i was like hey this is what i'm going to
do and the professor is like that's
brilliant no understanding of medicine
no understanding of mba stuff no
understanding of any of that crap
if you give them a close-ended task and
give them the parameters
gamers are good at this gamers are bad
at this so if you have a problem with
executive dysfunction the first thing
that you need to do
is learn how to turn this into this so
that's called
operationalizing problems there's a
there's a actually an exercise that we
share in dr k's guide so we talk a lot
about this in dr k's guide but i'll
share the exercise with you now so this
is what i tell people who have
um executive dysfunction like as a
therapist
what i'll say is pretend you are
paralyzed from the the neck down
and pretend you have a servant who will
do exactly what you tell them to do
what would you how would you tell them
to like accomplish this task
so in the terms of like finding a job
it's like you're paralyzed you like
literally have to tell them
go to my computer log in open a web
browser
do a google search for jobs available
in you know washington dc
what do you see there okay then do this
then do this then do this
and what i find with with people who
have executive dysfunction is that when
you really like work them through that
process
they will actually be able to like
execute on tasks so the first thing is
operationalizing problems
second problem with executive
dysfunction is frustration
and emotions a lot of people with
executive dysfunction
also have adhd or the other way around
so people with adhd have trouble like
with executive
function okay so this is the really
interesting thing is that i find that
when you're
paralyzed towards behavior there's like
a practical component to it
but there's also this component of like
feeling so
damn dumb and feeling so damn
incompetent and frustrated with yourself
that it actually negatively impacts your
behavior because if we think about like
what
promotes behavior right so like it's not
frustration and negative emotion
it's like inspiration and confidence so
what people with executive dysfunction
literally have to do in order to improve
their dysfunction
is digest these emotions so we'll do
therapy around this
because any time you're thinking about
taking a behavior right like so
if i have an idea and then i want to
take an action
what goes in here what is this composed
of it's composed of
operationalizing and then there's going
to be like
there's going to be good emotions and
there's going to be
bad emotions right so there's like a war
between my good emotions and my bad
emotions
in terms of whether i take the action or
not if i think i'm going to fail if like
you know if i think i'm good at it like
if i feel confident then i'll take the
action
so that those are a couple of pieces
that go into it okay
so we're paralyzed towards the behavior
we have to learn how to operationalize
we have to learn how to like deal with
our negative
emotions and frustration i think
generally speaking i just do two things
with them so we tend to get to
processing their negative emotions and
then we operationalize problems
and we use that exercise and that tends
to be actually like the way that you
deal with executive
dysfunction and the third thing to to
remember is that over time
you will actually improve okay
yeah so people are talking about
meditation absolutely so you can also do
meditation
right so the uh it's that's good thank
you chat
see chad is learning so if we talk about
strengthening your frontal lobes
meditation actually strength
strengthens your mpfc your medial
prefrontal cortex
which is going to be like a big part of
what we want to talk about when it comes
to
operationalizing problems i think
another thing that we want to
talk a little bit about is you have to
be careful about
the thoughts that keep you from starting
so this is also like another cognitive
skill that you can learn so anytime
someone has this is related to the
emotions but like
if you think about problems with
operationalizing like this is where the
what-ifs happen right we were talking
about the what-ifs earlier
what if you know
so a lot of thoughts that keep you from
starting this kind of has to do a little
bit with like procrastination so
sometimes like
you know perfection can actually keep
you paralyzed as well like you want to
do it perfect
you don't want to like get a b so you're
not even gonna try for
until you're sure you can get an a
you're not even gonna you'd rather have
an
f than a 10 or 90 chance for an a
right you want a 100 chance of an a or
an f
so this is where there are particular
like psychological complexes or
cognitive things which you can actually
work on
these are almost like some scars so we
talk about a couple of these in dr k's
guides
i'll try to you know map more stuff out
but when it comes to
solving executive dysfunction it gets
better with time you have to learn how
to operationalize
which you can practically do deal with
the negative emotions that keep you from
acting
you can absolutely meditate and then the
fourth thing is that
you know there are particular thoughts
there are particular other
challenges that arise which have
specific solutions to them
questions about executive function does
it degrade after the age of 32 not
really
is it different from motivational issues
no so so here's the problem there's no
sanskrit word for motivation
so motivation i think is one of the
worst words in the english language
because
it lumps together all of these
disparate processes under like one term
it's like and so the problem like if you
look at like solutions to motivation
like if you do
a google search for like solutions to
motivation you will find
a million websites with a bunch of
people who will
sell you their product for like how to
get more motivated and we're guilty of
that too
the problem is like if they're all these
solutions to motivation like
why isn't everyone super motivated none
of them work why don't they work because
it's a problem of misdiagnosis
motivational problems could be adhd it
could be executive
dysfunction it could be trauma it could
be like a lack of clarity of goal it
could be that
you're not motivated because it's
something you should do instead of
something that you care about
there are all kinds of like nuances to
motivation it's actually a
a bunch of different neuroscientific
psychological
and spiritual problems and the way that
i help motivate people is because like i
don't call it motivation it's like
what's your actual problem
so you could look at someone with
executive dysfunction you could say this
problem has a problem this person has a
problem with motivation
but they're absolutely they can't act
when they want to act right that's what
motivation is
but if you look at it like their actual
problem is not
a lack of motivation that's a symptom
their problem
is is executive dysfunction and so in
that way
a lack of motivation has a differential
diagnosis
that includes a lot of different things
you